all reindeer here eat the claydonia
group of lichen
a nutritious mix of algae and fungi
it grows all over these northern forests
so finding food for the reindeer on my
journey won't be an issue
today sunset is around quarter past two
in the afternoon it's the ideal time to
try out a specialist camera
i've brought to film the northern lights
and now i've got the perfect subjects to
test it on
hey boys watch i'm coming through
got my own version of antlers right here
come on
this is one of the most light-sensitive
cameras
in the world i have to say that these
images look beautiful in this in this
light
a short time ago if you wanted to film
these light levels you'd have to film in
in infrared and then everything is seen
in black and white but this camera picks
up
color and that's what i really want is
not just to see the
the northern lights and the shapes that
they make in the sky and to see that
there are lights in the sky but to
actually see
the richness of color hopefully even see
colors that i can't even see with my
my own eyes and filming the reindeer is
a good way to actually just get
a sense at this time of night of what
this camera can do
and my favorite friendlier reindeer
isn't
camera shy
this is really exciting i'm really
looking forward to the next stage of
this
adventure heading off into the wild with
with my reindeer
i've got one more day left with petri
and today he wants to show me how to
drive horrendously
i know which reindeer i'd like to use
but i need to see
what petri thinks hello boys
see i quite like i quite like this one
it seems friendlier is this is a good
one for
nicely for this good one but we take
this
a better one yeah why is that it's not
so old
like this one really because i was going
for which one
which one i liked the most the
friendliest one
it does make sense to take the bigger
stronger reindeer
but he just puts me a bit on edge
there's one thing i i don't quite like
about the reindeer
i should speak a bit more quietly
because i don't want it to hear me is
that it's got um
it's got quite an aggressive looking
part of its antler that comes straight
out
and every time i'm close to i think it's
gonna gouge my eye out
but i suppose it's about selecting the
best reindeer for the job
the job is to to pull the sleigh
to get to grips with sleigh riding petri
wants me to follow him
on an eight kilometer circuit of a
frozen lake
okay i sir you are ready yes i'm
positive i'm ready
okay our nearest hospital it's about 70
gallons in which direction
that's right okay 70 kilometers do you
know where the hospital is
hopefully we won't need that
[Music]
ready let's go
come on come on
while he may be the strongest reindeer
it seems
he's also the most stubborn
everything's okay come on
i really hope this isn't a sign of
things to come
[Music]
[Applause]
once my reindeer does get going i
can enjoy the ride
[Music]
there's something very very nice about
being pulled along through the snow
by a reindeer you can see why santa's
done this
all these years not something you could
grow tired off
reindeer make driving a sleigh easy
a gentle tap with rope is all that's
needed to keep them going
their splayed hooves act like snow shoes
come on boy so they can pool hundreds of
kilos
in weight and if the conditions are
right
they can cover nearly 50 kilometers in a
day
that's quite i suppose it's moving the
kind of pace that i could walk at
but the one thing it does do it gives me
the opportunity to look around
and enjoy the world about me
and it's beautiful it is a winter
[Music]
wonderland
finally with the skies completely clear
i get a glimpse of the phenomenon i've
been searching for
it's not what i was expecting it's just
like a big smear across the sky
it stretches around and it's kind of
rainbow that's a single color
of green all the way around to the
horizon on that side
[Music]
what i'm really hoping for is that
classic northern lights
big flowing river of light a big ribbon
through the sky
this is tantalizingly close
to seeing what i've come here to see
[Music]
as quickly as they appeared
the lights vanish
i have no way of telling when or if
they'll come back
without cloud cover temperatures plummet
to minus 25.
what could this be this level of
coldness actually makes you really tired
you're using up a lot of energy
just to stay warm without even moving it
moving around
it's like everything's cold you feel the
cold coming up from the ground
it's coming in from all sides it's just
sort of all consuming
and i'm just wondering if there is if i
have a a cut off point
if it's going to get so cold that it's
it's not going to be possible to
to stand out here
[Music]
my eyes begin to play tricks on me and i
start to question
what i'm seeing there is
something happening in the sky but
neither my eyes nor my camera can
fully see it as the northern lights it's
weird because at times it looks like
it can look like clouds moving very fast
and then as it is at the moment look at
that it's just burst into life
holy smokes gee whiz
that is phenomenal
it just changes in an instant look at
that
my goodness that is something else
[Music]
it starts off as a almost an
underwhelming cloud
and suddenly it starts to shift and take
form
and the lights start to dance and
flicker
and move and what is just a smear
becomes this
a rich texture that's moving across the
sky
from horizon to horizon
[Music]
every single second is is precious and
you get a sense
with every moment you watch this that as
far back in time
all those millions of years that this
has been taking place
it has never been like this before
and then it changes again
after a couple of hours the aurora build
to an incredible crescendo
these particles from the sun have
traveled nearly
150 million kilometers
[Music]
it's quite hard to take it all in it's
just
it is so grand so spectacular
is it's mind-blowing
i couldn't have filmed any of this
without my reindeer's help
[Music]
after a bumpy start i can't imagine
being here
with anyone else and i want something
special
to remember our time together that's a
boy
handsome handsome man yeah a good fellow
who said reindeers don't like hugs okay
boy
right okay right we'll do a selfie you
know what cell phones don't you
everyone does even reindeer got left
your head best smile
right boy look this way
three two one
[Music]
this has been an incredible journey
and to top it off i think i've got my
christmas card sorted
look at that beautiful animal look at
that
i wouldn't miss this for the world
how many reindeer we have about 150.
how many calves do you expect to have
how many
oh about 80.
can you tell me how long to them suckle
for the babies
suck mom during this
time three weeks only cycling only using
matters milk i can understand
why i'm being born on with snow on the
floor and it's so cold
it's cold but this is typical and now
weather is rather good because cold but
no
raining it is important no raining so
what are the rain do is it comes
if calf calves are wet
they can die if it is very cold and
windy
with it's very important that the
weather is just right then
yes yes the team get all their
information about the reindeer
by keeping really detailed records about
every car that's born here
right what's going to happen now is
mikka is going to put
this baby calve in the bag to weigh it
that's the first thing we got to do
first she'll weigh the calf
how big how big
5.3 kilograms 5.3 kilograms yes
very good okay so good yes and also
we use dna test because we like to know
who is father of this car or the father
oh yes yeah
okay
okay no very good
so that gives you all your information
and those things
yes condition and dna
tna test because lots of the calves are
killed by predators
they also fit radio collars so that they
can keep track of all of them
the red others they are very big problem
we have brown bear we have wolverines
we have also wolves and they
all kill also reindeer coffee ground
beer big bear obviously
in my own now i'm holding a newborn
reindeer car
it's hard to believe this was born only
last night
it was only a few hours old and what a
beautiful sight to see one of these
things and are they
here i am in the lapland i can't believe
it really
[Music]
mum's right behind me just waiting for
me to let it go so i shall hold it too
long
it's beautiful isn't it mom's coming
[Music]
oh
a sami family has agreed to teach me
everything they know about the northern
lights
reindeer and surviving in the arctic
wilderness
hello hello oh hello hello
the man i've come this far north to me
hello
welcome i'm gordon nice to meet you
petrie
so i read it's very it's rude to ask
someone how many reindeer they have is
that correct
yeah because i don't ask you how much
money in the bank you have
i have no money in the bank at the
moment
i can see there's a 40 at least here so
these are yeah
i don't want to know i don't want if
it's ridge i don't want to know i can
count them
petri mattis started looking after
reindeer
when he was just two years old
he comes from a long line of sami
reindeer herders
and still follows the traditional ways
so your shoes are they is that reindeer
fur yes yeah
much much better what you have now and
it's really best when there's minus
30 1 is 40. and i called us with the hp
and it's uh 1999 january there's one
week and there's minus 51. whoa
really so when it's down as low as minus
you don't see reindeer shaking and
shivering now
if they get enough wood in the forest no
problem with that
cold weather
reindeer evolved during the ice age
there are reports of them living in
temperatures as low as minus 70.
petrie leaves me in charge of feeding
time
so i can take a closer look at these
incredible animals
hey you over here
there we go it is amazing
to be eyeball to eyeball nose to nose
with
a reindeer the first thing i'm
struck by is their winter coat which is
up to seven
centimeters thick fur covers
almost every part of their body
it's almost impossible to sink my hand
into this
dense fur it is unbelievably thick
you can't part the hairs and see the
skin
beneath not only is the hair super thick
but each one of these
hair fibers is is hollow
so the animal is insulated and each
individual here
is insulated with that air void in the
middle
everything about them from their feet
to the tops of their antlers from the
tip of the nose to the end of the tail
they adapted to survive in one of the
harshest environments
on earth
february in arctic norway
the days are short and it's 30 degrees
below zero
this time of year every sami family must
round up their reindeer
and drive them into a corral
[Music]
it's a health check to sort out those
not fit enough to make the long
migration
later in spring
old and worn teeth means the reindeer
will be sold for slaughter
for meat and hide the profit from
reindeer harding
now the cake was good
good teeth mean a respite at least until
next year
good feet won't settle the
reindeer
this is mae toro ella's mother and
inga's aunt
she lives the sami life with passionate
enthusiasm
ella and inga have grown up absorbing
this passion
for the arctic and for these hardy
resilient reindeer
this far north it's too cold and too
tough for cows or sheep
only a creature that evolved during the
ice age
can really be at home in these harsh
landscapes
but reindeer are more than just arctic
farm animals
to survive here they need their wild
instincts
for this partnership to work the sami
have had to adapt to the reindeer's way
of life
as much as the reindeer have adapted to
the sami
in the past the sami used reindeer for
everything
from food and clothing to transport and
money they were nomads
following their herds living in reindeer
skin tents called lavoos
reindeer are still at the heart of sami
life though the sami have moved with the
times
may toro's family live in kautikano a
modern sami town in arctic norway
but many people still think of the sami
as locked in the past
we joke with them that we don't have
cars and we drive
only with reindeers
but we are just normal people
not so normal okay not so normal but we
are still known
[Music]
you